Overview
--------

Our hash table uses uint64_t keys and values.  We insist on 4 byte
aligned keys, (if they are pointers they will usually have much
greater alignment), but 4 is more than we need. (2 byte would be
enough).

The underlying hash table algorithm we use is linear probing. The
table grows when it reaches a compile-time threshold (typically about
60-70% full).

The operations we provide are add (insert or update), remove, and find
a key.  In the typical case, none of these operations require
obtaining a lock.

The main idea in growing a table will be to maintain a linked list of
tables, old and new.

list_header -> new table -> old table -> older table -> ... -> oldest table

When a table becomes full, we allocate a larger replacement, add it to
the front of the linked list, and start migrating entries from
old_table to the new table. All threads that operate on the table
contribute to the migration process. Before performing any operation
(i.e., add, remove, find), each thread must first move a fixed number
M of key/values pairs from the old table to the new table. When
migration completes, we say that the old table is *assimilated*. The
number M is chosen so that a new table cannot become full before the
old table has been assimilated.

We lazily reclaim old tables when they are no longer in use. Being able
to say when they are no longer in use is the hardest part of the design.

So an active table can be in one of three states:

0. the current table is the only table.

1. there is more than one table, the current table is new, and its
predecessor still contains key-value pairs that have not yet been
migrated to the new table.

2. there is more than one table, the current table is new, and its
predecessor table has been assimilated, all key-value pairs have been
migrated to the new table.


So as a first approximation, our hash table consists of a state and a
pointer to the list header, the front of the linked list of tables.
The question then, is "how can we release old tables?" The problem is
that, without additional information, there could always be slow
threads that wake up thinking that the old table is the current active
table.

We solve this problem by using reference counting. A thread's access
to the hash table is via a handle object. The add, remove, and find
operations all must use a handle, rather than the table itself.  The
handle maintains information about the thread's knowledge of the
table. Of particular interest is the thread's current idea of which
is the active table, and what is the oldest table the thread has
an active interest in.





A handle consists of:
 - self; the identity of the thread owning it
 - table; the list header
 - table_hdr; the thread's idea of the current table
 - last; the oldest table the thread knows about


When a thread creates a handle to a table, it increments the reference
count of the current table, and if the table is expanding, also the
next table in the linked list, which is the handle's last field.  If
the table is not expanding, last is just the current table.

Note that a handle may not be upto date. The list
header may in fact point to a newer table, and not the handle's table_hdr
field. However on creation we must ensure that it is upto date, and
this is one of the critical sections that we must protect with a lock.

Periodically a thread will ensure that its handle is upto date. During this process
it may move it's last field, and decrement reference counts. Similarly
at periodic intervals the last table in the linked list will be checked to see
if it be reclaimed (i.e. has zero) reference count.







Data Structures
---------------

TBD

Pseudo Code
-----------

TBD


Critical Sections
-----------------
